---
layout: post
title:  "Speeding up citation insertion"
date:   2017-04-02
categories: Dissertation Mendeley
---

I love Mendeley. It's one of those unassuming utilities that you just take for granted when everything is working as it should. As I'm finishing up my thesis, I noticed citation insertion seemed to take longer and longer.  There was plenty of potential culprits: my dated laptop, my even more dated copy of Word 2011 (Should I be using LaTeX? Probably.) or the Mendeley plugin. A quick perusal of the Mendeley support page indicates this is a perennial problem with a whole host of putative solutions such as updating the Mendeley Desktop client, resetting the local citation database or switching to IEEE style.

With such a ill defined problem, it's pretty hard to offer concrete solutions but I'll share some tests I ran in the hope that it provides some context for others users. First, some background on my testing environment: I'm running a MacBook Pro w/ 2.3 GHz Intel Core i7 and 8 GB RAM running El Capitan. References were inserted by Mendeley V. 1.17.9 into a Word 2011 document with 220 citations in ~30K words. For each style I inserted the reference as either the first in the document or one of the last 10.

*Nature Beginning: 2 min 7 sec
*Nature End: 11.7 sec
*IEEE Beginning: 1 min 30 sec
*IEEE End: 8.5 sec
*Chicago Style Beginning: 8.9 sec
*Chicago Style End: 12.1 sec
*APA Beginning: 6.8 sec
*APA End: 7.3 sec

Scientific work tends to favor continuously numbered references (first two styles), while the humanities often use (author, year) in text and alphabetized references (later two styles. The speed of citation insertion seems to be limited by the work of updating the numbering throughout the document in my case which is why it is much quicker to insert citations at the end of the document than the beginning. In my case I was able to realize a major speed up by using APA during the drafting of the document then switching to my preferred style at the end. THis my not solve the all cases of the problem but it demonstrates that switching to IEEE is probably not a helpful solution in any case.